Add release notes for `v1.0.0-RC2` (#2100)
VirtusLab/scala-cli: website/docs/release_notes.md

# Release notes

## [v1.0.0-RC2](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/releases/tag/v1.0.0-RC2)

## What's Changed

### Exclude

> To exclude specific source files or entire directories from a Scala CLI project using the exclude directive in your `project.scala` file or the command line parameter `--exclude`, along with a pattern:
> - absolute path: `/root/path/to/your/project/Main.scala`
> - relative path: `src/main/scala/Main.scala`
> - glob pattern: `*.sc`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To exclude specific source files or entire directories from a Scala CLI project, you can now us the `//> using exclude` directive in your `project.scala` file. Alternatively, you can do the same from the command line with the `--exclude` option.
Accepted pattern syntax:
- absolute path: `/root/path/to/your/project/Main.scala`
- relative path: `src/main/scala/Main.scala`
- glob pattern: `*.sc`
```

> For example, to exclude all files in the` example/scala` directory, add the following directive to your `project.scala` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, to exclude all files in the `example/scala` directory, add the following directive to your `project.scala` file:
```

```scala
//> using exclude "example/scala"
```

Added by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in [#2053](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/2053).

> ### Directives with a Test Scope Equivalent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Directives with a Test Scope equivalent
```

Some directives now have a test scope equivalent, such as `using dep` and its test scope counterpart `using test.dep`. This allows you to declare dependencies that are only used in tests outside of test-specific sources.

> For example, you can declare a dependency on munit in your `project.scala` file like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can declare a dependency on `munit` in your `project.scala` file like this:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```scala
````

//> using test.dep "org.scalameta::munit::0.7.29"
```
The dependency will only be available in test sources.

Here's a list of directives with a test scope equivalent with example values:

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```scala
````

 //> using test.dep "org.scalameta::munit::0.7.29"
 //> using test.jar "path/to/jar"
 //> using test.javaOpt "-Dfoo=bar"
 //> using test.javacOpt "source", "1.8", "target", "1.8"
 //> using test.javaProp "foo1=bar1"
 //> using test.option "-Xfatal-warnings"
 //> using test.resourceDir "testResources"
 //> using test.toolkit "latest"
```

Added by [@Gedochao](https://github.com/Gedochao) in  [#2046](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/2046)

### Changes to using-directives syntax

We've made several updates to simplify the using directives syntax in this release:

> - removed the possibility of nesting from the API.

Reviewer: is this point relevant to Scala CLI users?

Author: I don't think, so I remove it.

- allowed omitting commas in lists of values.
- disallowed multiline comments.
- removed multiline strings.
- removed `require` and `@require` syntax support.

> - allowed values without quotes.

Reviewer: I think it'd be awesome to include an example showing that commas and quotes are now optional.
maybe something like:
````
```scala
//> using scala 3.2.2
//> using javacOpt source 1.8 target 1.8
```
````

- removed `@using`.

> 
> 
> Added by [@tgodzik](https://github.com/tgodzik) in [#2076](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/2076)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Added by [@tgodzik](https://github.com/tgodzik) in [#2076](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/2076)
```

### Bootstrapped standalone fat JAR.

The Scala CLI launcher is available as a standalone fat JAR. You can download the nightly version of the Scala CLI fat JAR from Sonatype and try it now:

```bash ignore
cs launch org.virtuslab.scala-cli:cliBootstrapped:1.0.0-RC2 -M scala.cli.ScalaCli

> ```

Reviewer: The description suggests using a nightly version, but the example points to `1.0.0-RC2`...?
or is it either the nightly version or `1.0.0-RC2`? 
in the case of the latter, we need 2 examples, I think

Author: I think we shouldn't mention about nightly version.  I have updated this description and it now points to the stable version.

Added by [@romanowski](https://github.com/romanowski) in [#2005](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/2005).

> ### Access the Name of the Running Script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Access the path of the script being run from its code
```

> With the special `scriptPath` function, you can now easily access the name of the running script inside the script itself. Example of how to use the scriptPath variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the special `scriptPath` function, you can now easily access the name of the running script inside the script itself. Example of how to use the `scriptPath` value:
```

> With the special `scriptPath` function, you can now easily access the name of the running script inside the script itself. Example of how to use the scriptPath variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the special `scriptPath` function, you can now easily access the path of the script being run from inside the script itself. Example of how to use the `scriptPath` value:
```

```scala title=scripts/hello.sc
#!/usr/bin/env -S scala-cli shebang

println(scriptPath)
```

<ChainedSnippets>

```bash
chmod +x scripts/hello.sc
./scripts/hello.sc
```

```text
./scripts/hello.sc
```

</ChainedSnippets>

Added by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in [#1990](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1990)

### Explicit Handling of Paths in using-directives

The `${.}` pattern in directive values can now be replaced by the parent directory of the file containing the directive. This makes it possible to generate coverage output files relative to the source file location, for example:

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```scala
````

//> using options "-coverage-out:${.}"
```

Added by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in [#2040](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/2040)

### Fix deadlocks in Script Wrappers

We have resolved an issue that caused deadlocks when threads were run from the static initializer of the wrapper object 
([#532](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/532) and [#1933](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1933)).
Based on the feedback from the community (Thanks [@dacr](https://github.com/dacr)), we found that encapsulating the script code

> into a class wrapper fixes the issue. The wrapper is generated by the Scala CLI and is not visible to the user.

Reviewer: It might be worth mentioning the behaviour change when `@main` is used, maybe with an output error example

```scala
//> using test.dep "org.scalameta::munit::0.7.29"
```
The dependency will only be available in test sources.

Here's a list of directives with a test scope equivalent with example values:

```scala
 //> using test.dep "org.scalameta::munit::0.7.29"
 //> using test.jar "path/to/jar"
 //> using test.javaOpt "-Dfoo=bar"
 //> using test.javacOpt "source", "1.8", "target", "1.8"
 //> using test.javaProp "foo1=bar1"
 //> using test.option "-Xfatal-warnings"
 //> using test.resourceDir "testResources"
 //> using test.toolkit "latest"
```

Added by [@Gedochao](https://github.com/Gedochao) in  [#2046](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/2046)

### Changes to using-directives syntax

We've made several updates to simplify the using directives syntax in this release:

- allowed omitting commas in lists of values.
- disallowed multiline comments.
- removed multiline strings.
- removed `require` and `@require` syntax support.
- allowed values without quotes.
- removed `@using`.

For example, the following using directives are now valid without the need for commas and quotes:

```scala
//> using scala 3.2.2

> //> using javacOpt source 1.8 target 1.8

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
//> using javacOpt -source 1.8 -target 1.8
```

```

Added by [@tgodzik](https://github.com/tgodzik) in [#2076](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/2076)

### Bootstrapped standalone fat JAR.

The Scala CLI launcher is available as a standalone fat JAR. You can download the stable version of the Scala CLI fat JAR from Maven and try it now:

```bash ignore
cs launch org.virtuslab.scala-cli:cliBootstrapped:1.0.0-RC2 -M scala.cli.ScalaCli
```

Added by [@romanowski](https://github.com/romanowski) in [#2005](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/2005).

### Access the path of the script being run from its code

> With the special `scriptPath` function, you can now easily access the path of the being run from script inside the script itself. Example of how to use the `scriptPath` variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the special `scriptPath` function, you can now easily access the path of the script being run from the script code itself. 
Here's an example of how to use the `scriptPath` value:
```
